So, let's talk about using wrapper classes,
autoboxing, and auto unboxing in the next few videos.
A primitive data wrapper class wraps the value of the primitive type in an object.
So, an object of type Byte, the capital B for example,
contains a single field whose type is the primitive data type
byte with a lowercase b.
So, primitive wrapper classes are used
to create an object that represents a primitive type in the collection classes
among other things.
Wrapper objects are initialized to null
if used as class members or instance members, not to the default value of the
primitive data type.
So, the following table lists the eight primitive data types and the corresponding wrapper,
all but two of the wrapper classes extend java.lang.number.
Boolean and character do not.
Wrapper classes are final and cannot be used
in an extends clause of another class.
So, you can see to the left there we've got primitive type,
Boolean, byte, char,
short, int, long, float, and double.
The wrapper class in the middle there which is basically the same
in pretty much all of them other than the fact it's got a capital letter.
The exceptions there are character, the capital C for char,
an integer with a capital I for Int, the rest have the same name.
And you can see over to the right hand side as I mentioned six of the eight
extend number, the two that don’t are boolean and char.
You can see that they both extend object.
So autoboxing and unboxing are the terms for the automatic conversion
that the Java compiler makes between the primitive types
and their corresponding object wrapper classes.
Autoboxing occurs when assigning a primitive literal or variable
directly to a wrapper variable of the corresponding type.
Unboxing, well, that occurs when assigning a wrapper variable or object
directly to a primitive variable of the corresponding type.
The Jvm autoboxes and unboxes in many situations
but not all of them.
I will be reviewing those exceptions in this video or one of the next few.
Wrapper constructors have been deprecated, and are unnecessary.
You can create instances of wrappers using a valueOf method
and I'll also be discussing that.
So, let's start some code now and you can see I've created a new project
called GenericsAndCollections.
So in that project, we need a new class here,
we're going to call the class WrapperClassAssignments.
All right, we'll paste in some code. All right, there's the code.
Well, so firstly, there's two static fields which will demonstrate
default values for a primitive Boolean and a Boolean wrapper.
Noting that they're not the same.
Moving on down, we've also got two instance fields
which will demonstrate assignments that autobox and unbox.
All right, we've got a total of three static methods here.
Starting with these two down the bottom,
one that accepts a Boolean parameter, that's the wrapper parameter,
and one that accepts a Boolean primitive type parameter.
Now, I'm purposely avoiding overloading here
which I’ve covered extensively in my 1Z0-819 part 1 course here on Udemy.
If you need a recap of overloading, refer to section 7 in that course
determining which overloaded method gets called.
So, I demonstrated that autoboxing and unboxing occur during method invocation.
All right, then lastly, go back up to our main method.
This demonstrates autoboxing and unboxing, as well as invoking the various methods.
All right, so let's run that. Okay, so there's the output.
So looking at the code in the main method, you can see that the first line of output
was setting a wrapper variable to a Boolean variable, Boolean as in the primitive type,
so it's demonstrating autoboxing.
So, looking at my instance boolean with the lowercase b,
you can see that's obviously a boolean primitive type and we're getting the value
from Boolean the wrapper that's unboxing the value
back to a primitive type, and we're getting the value from b wrapper variable of true.
Moving on down, we're then setting a wrapper variable
on line 28 to a boolean literal
and the Jvm is autoboxing that to the boolean wrapper class.
Third example is setting a primitive variable directly to a wrapper
for unboxing this time because looking at my instance Boolean with a capital B this time,
we can see that that's a wrapper which is set to false initially,
that's why we've got false for third line of output.
Next, we're passing a boolean primitive to a boolean and wrapper parameter
by autoboxing. Have a look at testBoolean,
which is that method there on line 46.
So, you can see that's automatically converted the primitive type for boolean
to a boolean wrapper there by autoboxing.
The last one here, we're passing a boolean that's in a wrapper local variable
and that's the testBoolean bWrapperVariable,
and that's calling the testboolean with b in a lowercase function,
which is this one here, which is obviously accepting a primitive type Boolean.
We can just mention that. Again, I'm trying to avoid overloading the method
because I didn't want the JVM to decide which method is invoked,
we're doing this manually to make it really clear as to what's going on here.
All right, so hopefully you can see that by running it the way we have.
we've confirmed that a boolean field on a class
is false by default. We've confirmed that any boolean literals or
variables are also boxed when assigned to a boolean wrapper variable.
We confirm that boolean wrapper objects and variables are unboxed
when assigned to a boolean primitive type variable.
Any boolean primitive type literals or variables are autoboxed
when passed to a method with a boolean wrapper parameter,
this assumes that there's not a better matched overloaded method.
And finally, boolean wrapper objects or variables are unboxed,
we're passed to a method with a boolean primitive type parameter
and again, this assumes there's not a better matched overloaded method.
All right, so let's make some changes to this code. We'll start by making the simple change.
I'm going to change the first line or line 11 there,
we're going to remove the equals true to see what the default is.
That's now just going to be static Boolean, that's in the wrapper myStaticBoolean.
So, so far, you can see there we've got no problems with the code, there's nothing
showing as a compiler error, but if we run this code,
you can see suddenly we've got an exception.
In my case, you can see it's on line 18 and there's the error, so you can see with our null
pointer exception
So, the reason that we've got a null pointer exception
here is that the myStaticBoolean variable which is a boolean wrapper
is by default null and has no value.
If your wrapper is null, then unboxing will generate a null pointer exception as we've seen here.
We'll go back now and just put the initialization back in and set it back to true,
and obviously, when we run this, this will then work again.
All right, so let's end the video here.
And in the next one, we're going to look at some of the many wrapper methods
you should be familiar with.
See you in the next video.